2.9 blog post (#741)
withastro/astro.build: src/content/blog/astro-290.mdx

---
title: "Astro 2.9: View Transitions (experimental)"
description: "Astro 2.9 is out with experimental support for View Transitions, allowing smooth page transitions."
publishDate: "July 20, 2023"
authors:
  - matthew
coverImage: ""
socialImage: ""
lang: "en"
---

Astro 2.9 is out and features experiment support for [view transitions](https://developer.chrome.com/docs/web-platform/view-transitions/), as well as redirects configuration and improved script bundling.

- **[View Transitions (experimental)](#view-transitions-experimental)**
- **[Redirects](#redirects)**
- **[Hoisted script optimization](#hoisted-script-optimization)**

> If you already have Astro installed, you can upgrade it to 2.9 by running the `upgrade` command in your project (using your package manager of choice):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you already have Astro installed, you can upgrade it to 2.9 by running the upgrade command in your project (using your package manager of choice):
```
removing the inline code because you use `install` for npm, so let's just use the English phrase "upgrade command" vs making it code.

```
npm install astro@latest
pnpm upgrade astro@latest
yarn upgrade astro@latest
```

While you're at it, upgrade any `@astrojs/*` integrations and adapters you have installed, too!

## View Transitions (experimental)

> Astro now supports [view transitions](https://developer.chrome.com/docs/web-platform/view-transitions/) through the new `<ViewTransitions />` component and the `transition:animate` (and associated) directives. View transitions are a great fit for content-oriented sites, and we see it as the best path to get the benefits of client-side routing (smoother transitions) without sacrificing the more simple mental model of MPAs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Astro now supports [view transitions](https://developer.chrome.com/docs/web-platform/view-transitions/) through the new `<ViewTransitions />` component and the `transition:animate` directive. Get the benefits of client-side routing (smoother transitions) without sacrificing the simplicity of an MPA.
```
something something, wasn't someone just complaining about everyone using the phrase "mental model" all the time?  :laughing

For the blog post, which doesn't have to be comprehensive docs, let's not "sacrifice the simplicity" of this message!

Enable support for view transitions in Astro 2.9 by adding the experimental flag to your config:

```js
import { defineConfig } from 'astro/config';

export default defineConfig({
  experimental: {
    viewTransitions: true,
  },
});
```

This enables you to use the new APIs added.

### &lt;ViewTransitions /&gt;

> This is a component which acts as the _router_ for transitions between pages. Add it to the `<head>` section of each individual page where transitions should occur _in the client_ as you navigate away to another page, instead of causing a full page browser refresh. To enable support throughout your entire app, add the component in some common layout or component that targets the `<head>` of every page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is a component which acts as the _router_ for transitions between pages. Add it to the `<head>` section of each individual page where transitions should occur _in the client_ as you navigate away to another page, instead of causing a full page browser refresh. 

To enable support throughout your entire app (SPA mode), add the component in some common layout or component that targets the `<head>` of every page.
```
Just breaking up a long-ish paragraph, and separating out the line that actually refers to the code sample

**CommonHead.astro**

```astro
---
import { ViewTransitions } from 'astro:transitions';
---

<meta charset="utf-8" />
<title>{Astro.props.title}</title>
<ViewTransitions />
```

With only this change, your app will now route completely in-client. You can then add transitions to individual elements using the `transition:animate` directive.

### Animations

Add `transition:animate` to any element to use Astro's built-in animations.

```astro
<header transition:animate="slide"></header>
```

In the above, Astro's `slide` animation will cause the `<header>` element to slide out to the left, and then slide in from the right when you navigate away from the page.

You can also customize these animations using any CSS animation properties, for example, by specifying a duration:

```astro
---
import { slide } from 'astro:transition';
---

<header transition:animate={slide({ duration: 200 })}></header>
```

### Continue learning

Check out the [client-side routing docs](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/client-side-routing/) to learn more.

## Redirects

> This change moves the `redirects` configuration out of experimental. If you were previously using experimental redirects, remove the following experimental flag:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This change moves the `redirects` configuration out of experimental status. If you were previously using experimental redirects, remove the following experimental flag:
```

```js
import { defineConfig } from 'astro/config';

export default defineConfig({
  experimental: {
    redirects: true,
  }
});
```

> If you have been waiting for stabilization before using redirects, now you can do so. Check out [the docs on redirects](https://docs.astro.build/en/core-concepts/routing/#redirects) to learn how to use this built-in feature.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you have been waiting for stabilization before using redirects, wait no longer! You can now safely use redirects in your project. Check out [the docs on redirects](https://docs.astro.build/en/core-concepts/routing/#redirects) to learn how to use this built-in feature.
```

> A basic example is this, in your configuration, add a map of paths to redirect from and to:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In your configuration, add a map of old and new paths to redirect from and to:
```

```js
import { defineConfig } from 'astro/config';

export default defineConfig({
  redirects: {
    '/old-page': '/new-page'
  }
});
```

## Hoisted script optimization

Astro's static analysis to determine which `<script>` tags to bundle together just got a little smarter!

> Astro create bundles that optimize script usage between pages and place them in the head of the document so that they are downloaded as early as possible. One limitation to Astro's existing approach has been that you could not dynamically use hoisted scripts. Each page received the same, all-inclusive bundle whether or not every script was needed on that page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Astro create bundles that optimize script usage between pages and place them in the head of the document so that they are downloaded as early as possible. One limitation to Astro's existing approach has been that you could not dynamically use hoisted scripts. When using libraries that re-exported components, each page received the same, all-inclusive bundle whether or not every script was needed on that page.
```
I *think* this is what the PR author was getting at in the original PR when they added a comment after merging! Double-check for nuance!

Reviewer 2: There's also a verbal disagreement in this line, adding this on top of Sarah's suggestion!
```suggestion
Astro creates bundles that optimize script usage between pages and place them in the head of the document so that they are downloaded as early as possible. One limitation to Astro's existing approach has been that you could not dynamically use hoisted scripts. When using libraries that re-exported components, each page received the same, all-inclusive bundle whether or not every script was needed on that page.
```

Now, Astro has improved the static analysis to take into account the actual imports used.

> For example, Astro would previously bundle the `<script>`s from both the `<Tab>` and `<Accordian>` component for the following library that re-exports multiple components:

Reviewer 2: Fixing the component name and number agreement
```suggestion
For example, Astro would previously bundle the `<script>`s from both the `<Tab>` and `<Accordion>` components for the following library that re-exports multiple components:
```

**@matthewp/my-astro-lib**

```js
export { default as Tabs } from './Tabs.astro';
export { default as Accordion } from './Accordion.astro';
```

> Now, when an Astro page only uses a single component, Astro will send only the necessary script to the page. A page that only imports the `<Accordian>` component will not receive any `<Tab>` component's scripts:

Reviewer 2: same here
```suggestion
Now, when an Astro page only uses a single component, Astro will send only the necessary script to the page. A page that only imports the `<Accordion>` component will not receive any `<Tab>` component's scripts:
```

You can also customize these animations using any CSS animation properties, for example, by specifying a duration:

```astro
---
import { slide } from 'astro:transition';
---

<header transition:animate={slide({ duration: 200 })}></header>
```

### Continue learning

Check out the [client-side routing docs](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/client-side-routing/) to learn more.

## Redirects

This change moves the `redirects` configuration out of experimental status. If you were previously using experimental redirects, remove the following experimental flag:

```js
import { defineConfig } from 'astro/config';

export default defineConfig({
  experimental: {
    redirects: true,
  }
});
```

If you have been waiting for stabilization before using redirects, wait no longer! You can now safely use redirects in your project. Check out [the docs on redirects](https://docs.astro.build/en/core-concepts/routing/#redirects) to learn how to use this built-in feature.

In your configuration, add a map of old and new paths to redirect from and to:

```js
import { defineConfig } from 'astro/config';

export default defineConfig({
  redirects: {
    '/old-page': '/new-page'
  }
});
```

> ## Hoisted script optimization

Reviewer 3: Should we credit the author of the PR in this section? It'd be nice imo

Author: Yes, good point, I'll add that.

Astro creates bundles that optimize script usage between pages and place them in the head of the document so that they are downloaded as early as possible. One limitation to Astro's existing approach has been that you could not dynamically use hoisted scripts. When using libraries that re-exported components, each page received the same, all-inclusive bundle whether or not every script was needed on that page.

Now, Astro has improved the static analysis to take into account the actual imports used.

For example, Astro would previously bundle the `<script>`s from both the `<Tab>` and `<Accordion>` components for the following library that re-exports multiple components:

**@matthewp/my-astro-lib**

```js
export { default as Tabs } from './Tabs.astro';
export { default as Accordion } from './Accordion.astro';
```

Now, when an Astro page only uses a single component, Astro will send only the necessary script to the page. A page that only imports the `<Accordion>` component will not receive any `<Tab>` component's scripts:

```astro
---
import { Accordion } from '@matthewp/my-astro-lib';
---
```

> You should now see more efficient performance with Astro now supporting this common library re-export pattern.

Reviewer 4: Suggestion to remove the double “now”:

```suggestion
You should now see more efficient performance with Astro supporting this common library re-export pattern.
```
